---
layout: post
title: "GSoC Week 1: Bugs Ahoy!"
date: 20 June 2022 00:00:00 +0530
categories: blog
---

This blog post is related to my [GSoC 2022 project][project-link].

In the past week, I worked mainly on [trying to fix the "MSVC x86_64" CI][fix-link-1]
for RadialGM.

- First, I updated the vcpkg "version" in the CI by updating the git commit hash that was being used. This fixed
  a bug where vcpkg was complaining about MSVC not being found, because the `windows-latest` VM in the Azure Pipelines CI
  had updated to use Visual Studio 2022 whereas the old version of vcpkg being used only supported Visual Studio versions
  upto 2019.

- After this, I decided to split up the MSVC CI into two separate pipelines, one for Visual Studio 2019 pinned at the
  `windows-2019` VM and another one using `windows-latest` currently at Visual Studio 2022.

- I then shifted my focus to fix the errors that were occuring during the actual build. There were two of these, one being
  `qt5-multimedia` not being found and the other one being `fatal error LNK1107: invalid or corrupt file` when trying to
  link the protobuf library. In the case of the former, the fix was fairly straightforward, as it involved just adding
  `qt5-multimedia` as a dependency to be installed by vcpkg. It seems that this package was separated out of the main
  `qt5-base` or `qt5-tools` packages at some point.

  The second error was more complex, and it took some time to figure out. The issue that was happening was when linking
  `emake`, the linker was trying to use `libprotobuf.dll` instead of `libprotobuf.lib`, which did not work as linking
  only works with .lib files on windows. Me and `@gfundies` initially assumed that the error was coming either from our CMake
  config or the `FindProtobuf.cmake` script supplied by protobuf.

  However, after exploring the various `.cmake` files used by ENIGMA and provided by protobuf, I could not see any
  issues in any of the files. After experimenting with some CMake command line definitions, I was able to get a fix to work
  on my VM by explicitly setting the `PROTOBUF_LIBRARY` flag to the path of `libprotobuf.lib`.

  This was not a very good fix however, as it was a temporary hack which could break if the .lib file changed its location,
  and it did not work when pushed to the CI anyways. The actual fix was a lot simpler: I changed the RadialGM `CMakeLists.txt`
  config from

    ```cmake
    #Find gRPC
    find_package(gRPC CONFIG REQUIRED)
    target_link_libraries(${EXE} PRIVATE gRPC::gpr gRPC::grpc gRPC::grpc++)

    # Find Protobuf
    include(FindProtobuf)
    include_directories(${Protobuf_INCLUDE_DIRS})
    target_link_libraries(${EXE} PRIVATE ${Protobuf_LIBRARIES})
    ```

  to

    ```cmake
    # Find Protobuf
    include(FindProtobuf)
    include_directories(${Protobuf_INCLUDE_DIRS})
    target_link_libraries(${EXE} PRIVATE ${Protobuf_LIBRARIES})

    #Find gRPC
    find_package(gRPC CONFIG REQUIRED)
    target_link_libraries(${EXE} PRIVATE gRPC::gpr gRPC::grpc gRPC::grpc++)
    ```

  i.e. I swapped the order of inclusion of gRPC and protobuf and it fixed the error. It seems that gRPC sets up protobuf
  in such a way that it is not able to detect the .lib files which are installed and instead falls back to the .dll files.

- Currently, the Visual Studio 2019 CI is passing, however the Visual Studio 2022 CI is failing for a reason I do not know.
  Everything builds fine, however when executing the installation command (`cmake --install . --config MinSizeRel`), it seems
  that the `objdump` command fails on a file, which causes the whole build to fail. Based on the order of the output, it seems
  that it is failing on `pcre2-16.dll`. However, there is no way to be sure of this as there is no output specifying the name
  of the file it failed on.

I also [worked on the DnD code generator][fix-link-2] this week. After
discussing with `@R0bert`, I learned that the reason the `__if__` variable was generated is for scoping using `with()`
statements to work correctly.

```hs
[5:21 PM] R0bert: the reason it has to be done is because the if itself (aka "action_if") can be scoped with applies to
[5:22 PM] R0bert: which means you have to run "if" inside "with"
[5:22 PM] R0bert: because it don't you'd otherwise need to prepend "self." to all the var accesses inside the if statement
```

Thus, I rolled back my change which got rid of the `__if__` variable, and redid the `with()` scope generation code to
use `who_name()` directly, which stores the name of the target which the action applies to.

Therefore, when dealing with "if"/conditional actions (called question actions in GML), instead of just emitting

```cpp
if (condition) body
```

we require code in the form of

```cpp
{
    __if__ = condition;
    if (condition)
        body
}
```

The problem with the current code generator was that it assumed all actions as a flat sequence, without considering the nesting
that happens with a question action and its body (and an else-action if present). This caused an issue where there was no way to 
know when to emit the closing curly brace for a given question action, as there was no way to know where the body of the question
action ended in a flat sequence.

I created two functions to fix this, `GetNextAction` and `Action2Code`, whose names should be self-explanatory.

- The first function, `GetNextAction`, takes as input the `std::vector<buffer::resources::Action>` which contains the list of actions to be
  converted into code and the current position in the vector, and returns two pointers pointing to the first and last element of
  the next action sub-sequence. This means that block actions (delimited by `ACT_BEGIN` and `ACT_END`) are considered as one action,
  and question actions can have their bodies handled too, by returning the last action in the body as the last element of the
  sub-sequence.

  This also requires coalescing `ACT_ELSE` (else-actions) with question actions. Without that, the following issue occurs:

    ```cpp
    {
        __if__ = condition;
        if (condition)
            body
    }
    else
        body
    ```

  As the else-action is considered separately from the question action, the question action generates the curly braces
  which causes a syntax error because of having an else without a previous if.

  Less importantly, `ACT_REPEAT`s (repeat-actions) also have the next action considered as their body, however I do not know
  how necessary that actually is.

- The second function, `Action2Code`, converts the given sub-sequence of actions to code. It simply copies the code that
  was there previously in `Actions2Code`, with one change: when encountering a question action, it dispatches to the
  `Question2Code` action, which is responsible for making sure that the curly braces are emitted around the if-statement.

Along with that, I created a function `PushIfRequired`. This is the system responsible for making sure that within
nested actions, unnecessary `with()` statements are not generated in the form of

```py
with (obj_1) {
    do_something();
    with (obj_1)
        do_something_else();
}
```

where nested actions which both have "applies to" enabled and target the same object do not emit the same `with()` twice.

This is handled by using a `std::stack<std::string>`, which stores the current object being targeted by the action
we are currently in. If the stack is empty, it is equivalent to not having a target for the current action, which means
targeting `self`. If the object the current action is targetting is already on top of the stack, there is no need to
emit a `with()` because the action we are within would already have emitted the `with()` to target that object if required.

At the end of each action, if an object name was pushed onto the stack, it is popped off. This does mean that targets
are only tracked within nested actions and not across a sequence of actions, as that would require a pre-processing step
to clump together actions which target the same object, which would cost some processing time and would require more
complex logic.

I also created a test for the new code generation system, which runs with my PR but not with the current iteration of
LGM. This test tests nested question actions, nested "applies to" and action-blocks delimited by `ACT_BEGIN` and `ACT_END`.

In the coming week, I will be working mainly on the EDL parser along with its BNF file, and I will slowly
start looking over the buffer functions and how they work as well. This will require a dicussion of endianness (for
serialization and deserialization), and what binary floating point / complex format is to be used.

[project-link]: https://summerofcode.withgoogle.com/programs/2022/projects/BrXiUNA2
[fix-link-1]: https://github.com/enigma-dev/RadialGM/pull/230
[fix-link-2]: https://github.com/enigma-dev/enigma-dev/pull/2304