---
layout: post
title: "GSoC 2023 Week 6 - <mono-head>RegAlloc</mono-head> Experiments"
date: 23 June 2023 00:00:00 +0530
categories: blog
---

This blog post is related to my
<a href="https://summerofcode.withgoogle.com/programs/2023/projects/JdqGUwNq">GSoC
2023 Project</a>.

This week, I spent most of my time just analyzing code. I was digging mainly through profiles of
`RegAllocGreedy`, and I was trying to find areas to improve. While I wasn't able to do much in general, I
was able to get one useful patch out of it:
<a href="https://reviews.llvm.org/D152781">https://reviews.llvm.org/D152781</a>.

While going through the profiles, I noticed that a fair bit of time was being spent in the function
`BlockFrequency::operator+=`. I initially tried to see if I could optimize it, but there was not much to be
done there. Then I noticed that it wasn't being inlined, so I asked around and got to know that LLVM in general is not
built using LTO. As this function is called quite a lot, such a simple thing not being inlined led to an
unnecessary overhead. By moving this method into the header so that it could be inlined everywhere, a
<a href="https://llvm-compile-time-tracker.com/compare.php?from=6ee594be53e7efaa12086ad20f0d0268092a4c73&to=6ac6cd99e211fae5ae5de41ad608604aa22f1882&stat=instructions%3Au">0.1% improvement</a>
was gained.

I also tried a few other experiments, which led to no useful gains:

- <a href="https://github.com/llvm/llvm-project/commit/7b84d0b58d8b67fdc46c0aebede53ab010ce6be7">Trying to speed up
  `BitVector::reference::operator=`</a> - I noticed that this function was using a branch where it
  wasn't necessary, however its probably not used often enough to matter.

- <a href="https://github.com/llvm/llvm-project/commit/2855324dbf886bd67502c59af1bd2edc4d1079c8">Replacing
  `array_pod_sort` with `std::sort`</a> - `array_pod_sort` is used in the LLVM
  codebase as it is not a template and instead uses `qsort` as its sorting algorithm. This gives a good
  binary size reduction as it reduces bloat caused by template instantiations. However, `std::sort` is
  a fair bit faster, and it gave a meaningful improvement in this case but not enough to warrant a patch.

- <a href="https://github.com/llvm/llvm-project/commit/89e8e31e38c3b767b237accecad58f148ca007a1">Changing a couple
  of container sizes</a> - This is my favourite kind of experiment, cause it is super easy and usually gives
  results. In this case, making the containers' small sizes just a bit bigger gives a slightly measurable result
  though it is actually not really distinguishable from noise.

- <a href="https://github.com/llvm/llvm-project/commit/63f623f6a735f41186db1adcc94a695b5ab33bae">Adding
  `LLVM_LIKELY` and `LLVM_UNLIKELY`</a> - I didn't expect this to have any real results, and
  it didn't. I noticed that a fair number of jumps were being taken when the condition was false on these
  conditions, which could have led to an issue with jumping to instructions which are out of cache. However, there
  is no such issue in reality because the jumps are likely too small to matter, so there was no measurable
  difference.

I also looked for a long time into `RegAllocFast`, however it is a very small file and very well optimized,
so I couldn't find anything to optimize in there. Similarly, `FastISel` also didn't seem to have too much
to optimize in it either, though I did certainly try :).
