---
layout: post
title: "GSoC 2023 Week 8 - <mono-head>InstCombine</mono-head> & <mono-head>SmallVector</mono-head> Experiments"
date: 06 July 2023 00:00:00 +0530
categories: blog
---

This blog post is related to my
<a href="https://summerofcode.withgoogle.com/programs/2023/projects/JdqGUwNq">GSoC
2023 Project</a>.

This week, I mostly worked on experiments regarding `InstCombine` that my mentor recommended me to check
out as possible places for improvements. One of these experiments does have some potential, though it needs further
investigation.

I also worked on creating an ADT which works like `SmallVector` but only does allocations on the stack.
This ADT was called `StackVector` and while it did not turn out to have any measurable improvements, it was
a good experiment to learn how to implement a container whose interface is compatible with `SmallVector`.

The experiments were:

- <a href="https://github.com/llvm/llvm-project/commit/eca87099ea457a7b3f1a39167a053e6aa43f33c5">
  Remove the call to `threadCmpOverPHI` in `simplifyICmpInst`
  </a> - This is a change to measure the speedup that can be gained by disabling `threadCmpOverPHI` as it
  seemed to be a fairly hot path in the code. This gave a
  <a href="https://llvm-compile-time-tracker.com/compare.php?from=dd639eb15aacfc865409915516f52385c4381923&to=eca87099ea457a7b3f1a39167a053e6aa43f33c5&stat=instructions:u">
    0.24% speedup</a>.

- <a href="https://github.com/llvm/llvm-project/commit/72561e65c9bf044e0628c8dc4b0ac15fe142ea7e">
  Limit the recursion depth in `threadCmpOverPHI` to 1.
  </a> - Other places in the compiler (such as `ValueTracking`) only allow recursing one level into phi
  nodes. By limiting the recursion depth to 1 in `InstSimplify` as well, it is possible to get a
  <a href="https://llvm-compile-time-tracker.com/compare.php?from=dd639eb15aacfc865409915516f52385c4381923&to=72561e65c9bf044e0628c8dc4b0ac15fe142ea7e&stat=instructions%3Au">
    0.1% speedup</a>. This is the patch that is worth pursuing.

- <a href="https://github.com/llvm/llvm-project/commit/ef0bc766b21f474db94ef9191d89697e3005ab0d">
  Query `!range` metadata only on `Load` and `Call` instructions
  </a> - `!range` metadata can occur only in `Load` and `Call` instructions, so it
  makes sense to only query it in those instructions. Unfortunately, this does not give a
  <a href="https://llvm-compile-time-tracker.com/compare.php?from=72561e65c9bf044e0628c8dc4b0ac15fe142ea7e&to=ef0bc766b21f474db94ef9191d89697e3005ab0d&stat=instructions:u">
    measurable improvement</a>.

- <a href="https://github.com/llvm/llvm-project/commit/7fb4cdcdb9b6fc7ecd4db6b0ac91dbb77da07126">
  Change `cmpExcludesZero` to return `std::optional<bool>`
  </a> - This change took me 3 days to make, because I spent all that time trying to figure out how the
  function actually works. `cmpExcludesZero` is a function that returns true whenever the predicate
  `Pred` being queried having the second operand `RHS` will always return false when the first
  operand (i.e. the LHS) is zero, hence the name.

  If it is called with the inverse predicate of `Pred` and it returns true, it means that the predicate
  will always return true when the LHS is zero. An example of this would be the expression `LHS == 0`.
  To merge these two cases into one, the following logic applies:

    - If the range of values where the comparison returns true includes zero, return false.

    - If the range does not include zero, return true.

    - As the range can only be generated when the RHS is a known-constant value, return failure (i.e. `std::nullopt`)
      to indicate that there is no way to predict the result.

  It is quite unfortunate then, that this does not give a
  <a href="https://llvm-compile-time-tracker.com/compare.php?from=d96f235eb01d19cc9db6739217ce4d33fdae0f87&to=7fb4cdcdb9b6fc7ecd4db6b0ac91dbb77da07126&stat=instructions:u">
    measurable speedup
  </a>.

- <a href="https://github.com/llvm/llvm-project/commit/831822a0b9d9849a73ae285ecdbb2b23b0a0dac1">
  Track the value of `NumUsesExplored` in `isKnownNonNullFromDominatingCondition` inside
  inner loops as well
  </a> - This was an idea to reduce the number of iterations that the loops would perform, however they are not
  usually high enough for this to make a change.
  <a href="https://llvm-compile-time-tracker.com/compare.php?from=80f46b3929162637e536b28c2818dbbbe6cf8e8b&to=831822a0b9d9849a73ae285ecdbb2b23b0a0dac1&stat=instructions:u">
    No measurable improvement, unfortunately
  </a>.

- <a href="https://github.com/llvm/llvm-project/commit/a2c83776edb05b569ef28da74479010ec36eb614">
  Replace `getDereferenceableBytes()` with `hasParamAttribute()` in
  `Attribute::hasNonNullAttr()`
  </a> - Same thing as the above,
  <a href="https://llvm-compile-time-tracker.com/compare.php?from=831822a0b9d9849a73ae285ecdbb2b23b0a0dac1&to=a2c83776edb05b569ef28da74479010ec36eb614&stat=instructions:u">
    no measurable speedup
  </a>.

- <a href="https://github.com/llvm/llvm-project/commit/a49e4e4d6546b1991639a81869ae82f11fb71d6f">
  Delete the code for `Instruction::GetElementPtr` from `computeKnownBitsFromOperator`
  </a> - Simple change to measure the possible gains, gives a
  <a href="https://llvm-compile-time-tracker.com/compare.php?from=a2c83776edb05b569ef28da74479010ec36eb614&to=a49e4e4d6546b1991639a81869ae82f11fb71d6f&stat=instructions:u">
    0.7% speedup
  </a>.

`StackVector` was an idea that I had when I saw `SmallSet` and noticed that it only uses the
stack storage of the `SmallVector`, wasting code space and compile times on the part of the code used to
manipulate the heap storage. So, I spent 3-4 days trying to come up with a container that follows the exact interface
of `SmallVector`, just with storage limited to the stack. As it turns out, this is also a container that
may make it into the C++26 standard:
<a href="https://www.open-std.org/jtc1/sc22/wg21/docs/papers/2023/p0843r6.html">P0843,
`std::inplace_vector`</a>.

Designing this container was... interesting. `SmallVector` is relied on very heavily throughout LLVM, and
it is a super-optimized container with excellent performance. It does some strange things, however:

- Whenever the contained type satisfies some conditions, it switches from calling
  `std::uninitialized_move` to `std::uninitialized_copy`. This is good for performance for
  certain types, however it means that there are types where the move constructor has to behave like a copy
  constructor because even though the move constructor is called, the type is not move-constructible... not fun.
  I ended up giving up on this problem and just copied what `SmallVector` does.

- The iterators are pointers. While this is not a huge issue in actuality, it means that there is code that
  implicitly relies on them being pointers, for example the constructor for `ArrayRef`, which is another
  type that is designed to work well with `SmallVector`, for example having a constructor that accepts a
  `SmallVectorImpl`. This effectively means that there is no drop-in iterator type that works with the
  existing code, the iterators *have* to be pointers.

  - As an example, I tried to have an iterator type that could implicitly decay to the pointer type so that it would
    work fine with `ArrayRef`. Unfortunately, that did not work because it caused
    `Iterator::operator+` to have an ambiguity where it could resolve to either the overloaded
    `Iterator::operator+` or the `operator+(T*, ...)` that could be called by decaying the
    iterator to a pointer. Not fun.

  - Another problem with the explicit iterator type route was that `SmallVector` and its users rely on
    `iterator` being implicitly convertible to `const_iterator` (`T*` to
    `const T*`). This is also not fun to deal with, it made me have to create four distinct iterator
    types, where the `Const*` iterator types had implicit constructors from the corresponding iterator
    types. I just gave up and switched the iterators to pointers at this point, with the suggestion from my mentor.

- No explicit constructors. There are places in the code that rely on `SmallVector` being implicitly
  constructible from whatever, so its not possible to have explicit constructors without updating quite a few
  users. There is nothing wrong with this, it is just not very good practice. Always have `explicit`
  constructors when they accept only one argument.

This is what the final implementation ended up looking like:
<a href="https://github.com/llvm/llvm-project/blob/73af5c10ab093031f3258cc90ceb08364e35fd48/llvm/include/llvm/ADT/StackVector.h">
link</a>. I spent quite some time ironing out the bugs in this implementation, there were a lot of broken functions.
What helped me the most was adapting this container to the `SmallVector` unit tests, at least the ones that
would make sense to run on this. I had one really bad bug that took me way too long to fix though: in my excitement,
I ended up replacing the `SmallSetVector` type as well, but I forgot that `SetVector` actually
uses the heap storage as well. Unfortunately, this was not easy to debug as I ended up making `push_back()`
and `emplace_back()` fallible where it returned `end()` on the container being full, which meant
that it would end up silently corrupting stored data when the vector was full.

So, this led to one whole day where I was trying to build some tool, and it would keep failing on the TableGen step
where it would show a random failure somewhere. Even with assertions, this obviously did not fail anywhere because
the container had no assertions to trip :facepalm:. No more fallible operations for me, everything must crash and burn
when something goes wrong.

Even more unfortunately, though expected, no
<a href="https://llvm-compile-time-tracker.com/compare.php?from=7fb4cdcdb9b6fc7ecd4db6b0ac91dbb77da07126&to=69df2a5472699d3027c01226aebd81b803757aa0&stat=instructions:u">
meaningful improvements</a>, which is slowly becoming the tagline of my GSoC project :(. This also involved a change
where `SmallSet` would store a union of the set and the vector instead of both together, to save memory.
I was not able to measure if this made a difference in memory, though I expect it would have done <i>something</i>, at
the least. Oh well, it gave a tiny regression anyways, just as a last insult. I suspect I won't go on any container
making journeys any time soon, it is probably much easier to just make the ones that LLVM already has run faster.
