---
layout: post
title: "GSoC 2023 Week 9 - A Saturating Arithmetic And <mono-head>ICmp</mono-head> Fold"
date: 08 July 2023 00:00:00 +0530
categories: blog
---


This blog post is related to my
<a href="https://summerofcode.withgoogle.com/programs/2023/projects/JdqGUwNq">GSoC
  2023 Project</a>.


This week, I worked on a couple of optimizations in `InstCombine`: folds of the form
`u[add|sub]_sat(X, C) pred C2`, where both `C` and `C2` are constants. This fold
takes on the general formula:

```cpp
   u[add|sub]_sat(X, C) Pred C2
=> (OpWillWrap ? SaturatingValue : (X Binop C)) Pred C2
=>  OpWillWrap ? (SaturatingValue Pred C2) : ((X Binop C) Pred C2)
```

When the value of `SaturatingValue Pred C2` is true, we get the following fold:

```cpp
   OpWillWrap ?  true : ((X Binop C) Pred C2)
=> OpWillWrap || ((X Binop C) Pred C2
```

When the value is false, we get the following fold:

```cpp
    OpWillWrap ?  false : ((X Binop C) Pred C2)
=> !OpWillWrap ?  ((X Binop C) Pred C2 : false
=> !OpWillWrap && ((X Binop C) Pred C2
```

It is usually possible to combine these two checks into just one comparison. For the two intrinsics currently
implemented, the `OpWillWrap` checks look like the following:

- `usub_sat`: `X < C`

- `uadd_sat`: `X >= ~C`

While the `usub_sat` check is quite obvious, I found the `uadd_sat` one is not, so here is a
little derivation:

```cpp
   (X + C >= UINT_MAX)
=> (X     >= UINT_MAX - C)
=> (X     >= (UINT_MAX + ~C + 1)) [as -C == (~C + 1)]
=> (X     >= (~C + 0))            [as (UINT_MAX + 1) == 0]
=> (X     >= ~C)
```

This is a really neat way to check the condition without causing overflow through the addition.

It is possible to combine the value ranges for the two operands above, to yield just one `icmp` for the
overall expression. This can be done by noting the following:

- For operator `||`, either operand can be true for the whole expression to evaluate to true. This means
  the overall value range for the expression will be the union of the LHS and the RHS, where the LHS is the value
  range of the `OpWillWrap` expression. For the RHS, the value range remains the same across the two
  types of expressions.

- For operator `&&`, both operands have to be true for the whole expression to evaluate to true. This means
  the overall value range for the expression will be the intersection of the LHS and the RHS, where the LHS is the
  value range of the `!OpWillWrap` expression, which happens to be the exact inverse of the above so it
  maps quite cleanly to code.

Thus, I created the following two patches for the fold:

- <a href="https://reviews.llvm.org/D154206">D154206</a>

- <a href="https://reviews.llvm.org/D154565">D154565</a>

The reason that these patches took so long to make is because it took me quite a while to understand the semantics of
the fold itself. What helped me a lot was working out the simplifications on paper, then transferring it into code.
I got really stuck on the `||` vs. `&&` simplification, and then generalizing it to have the
same general formula for both also took some time. Overall, the patch for `usub_sat` took 5 days, whereas
the one for `uadd_sat` took 3 days. However, I learnt a fair bit about writing proofs on Alive2 from this,
and also learnt that its probably a good idea to mathematically verify that a transform actually works before
transferring it into code and just chucking it on phabricator for review :).
