---
layout: post
title: "GSoC 2023 Week 13 and 14 - Small Experiments"
date: 14 August 2023 11:11:11 +0530
categories: blog
---

This blog post is related to my [GSoC 2023 Project][project-link].

These two weeks, I worked on some random experiments, of which 3 had useful results. These were mostly done on the
branches [`perf/instcombine4`][instcombine4-link] and [`perf/instcombine5`][instcombine5-link]. While the commits on
both branches are functionally the same, the `perf/instcombine5` branch (naturally) contains the better / more updated
code which is far more likely to be made into patches.

On the `perf/instcombine4` branch, I made the following commits:

- [Replacing a slow O(n) lookup with a `DenseMap`][commit-link-1]: Within the function `TargetLibraryInfo::getLibFunc`,
  there is a lookup to the static, compile-time constant array `StandardNames` to find the index of the queried library
  function. These can be functions like `getc`, `putc`, `printf` etc. The problem with the old approach was that it was
  calling the function `std::lower_bound` to find the element, which would be much slower than just using a map lookup.
  
  So, I updated the code to use a `DenseMap` and that gave a decent [0.24% speedup][speedup-link-1].

- [Remove calls to `computeKnownBits` for non-intrinsic `CallInst` instructions][commit-link-2]: This was a minor thing,
  a continuation of the work done on moving handling for `LoadInst` into `isKnownNonZeroFromOperator` to directly check
  the presence of range metadata. Similarly, this commit moves the handling for "`getReturnedArgOperand`" from
  `computeKnownBits` into `isKnownNonZeroFromOperator`, which gives a [slight 0.06% speedup][speedup-link-2].

- [Reduce calls to `computeKnownBits` in `visitAdd` for `InstCombine`][commit-link-3]: This commit aimed to reduce the
  `computeKnownBits` calls in `computeConstantRangeIncludingKnownBits` by passing the `KnownBits` information computed
  in `haveNoCommonBitsSet` through to `willNotOverflowSignedAdd`. I implemented this by simply adding overloads for the
  required functions that take `KnownBits` parameters wherever required.

  This gave me a better speedup than I expected, [0.15%][speedup-link-3].

On the `perf/instcombine5` branch, I made a few changes to the last commit on feedback from my mentor, that being the
creation of a new class which would lazily compute the `KnownBits` information instead of piping it through the various
functions so that no new overloads would be needed. This class ended up taking on the name `CachedBitsValue`, which is
still a work in progress. It is a [fairly simple implementation][impl-link-1], which stores a `Value *` and the
`KnownBits` information associated with it. This information is computed as-required by calling `getKnownBits`, and the
computed value is cached within the class.

Unfortunately, to allow implicit creation from a `Value *`, any parameter that accepted either a `Value *` or a
`const Value *` needs to be updated to use a `const CachedBitsConstValue &` or a `const CachedBitsNonConstValue &`, to
allow implicit creation of a temporary. What this means is that both the `KnownBits` member and the boolean member that
signifies its presence need to be made `mutable` so that they can be modified from const objects. This is quite an ugly
solution, but it comes from the fact that C++ doesn't allow you to implicitly create an object that binds to a non-const
l-value reference.

With this in place however, the code for passing through `KnownBits` information becomes quite clean. This is shown by
the first commit below, where both of these commits are on the `perf/instcombine5` branch:

- [Reduce `computeKnownBits` calls][commit-link-4]: This is a rebase of the previous commit, with the overloads replaced
  by usage of `CachedBitsValue` and some extra work done to `isKnownNonZero`. This gives a slower speedup of
  [0.1%][speedup-link-4]. This is most likely because of the `isKnownNonZero` code causing a regression, however I will
  have to investigate further to know for sure.

- [Reduce `getLibFunc` calls][commit-link-5]: This commit aimed to reduce duplicate calls to `getLibFunc` that I found
  within `FortifiedLibCallSimplifier`. This builds upon the first commit from the previous branch, and I think further
  work can be done here to reduce the number of calls even more. However, with the optimization introduced by using
  `DenseMap`, this doesn't really do much and gives a [negligible difference][speedup-link-5].

I also tried reducing the number of `computeKnownBits` calls in `simplifyICmpInst`. I noticed that `visitICmpInst` was
calling `foldICmpUsingKnownBits`, which computes known bits information. Before that however, `simplifyICmpInst` calls
`simplifyICmpWithZero` which ends up calling `computeKnownBits` a few times, a redundant call which can be handled by
reusing the information computed before in `foldICmpUsingKnownBits`. This is incidentally where the change to
`simplifyICmpWithZero` comes from in the above commit using `CachedBitsValue`, however it unfortunately ended
up not giving a measurable improvement at all. It also led to three test regressions, which led to me abandoning the
patch.

[project-link]: https://summerofcode.withgoogle.com/programs/2023/projects/JdqGUwNq
[instcombine4-link]: https://github.com/dc03/llvm-project/tree/perf/instcombine4
[instcombine5-link]: https://github.com/dc03/llvm-project/tree/perf/instcombine5
[commit-link-1]: https://github.com/dc03/llvm-project/commit/957fe7c9862bada60f2773d2dd277f45162b3994
[commit-link-2]: https://github.com/dc03/llvm-project/commit/03da567f6351c725918293eb7ef9fd1a6ca46c7b
[commit-link-3]: https://github.com/dc03/llvm-project/commit/81a3c7a92dd0eb2a39a2f58e9a81eb832ad88c93
[speedup-link-1]: https://llvm-compile-time-tracker.com/compare.php?from=254d28fc13fb1b5e584c0baf25bff9b8b01ea348&to=957fe7c9862bada60f2773d2dd277f45162b3994&stat=instructions:u
[speedup-link-2]: https://llvm-compile-time-tracker.com/compare.php?from=957fe7c9862bada60f2773d2dd277f45162b3994&to=9319a13165363cd4119ddd4388b334e41abc3f85&stat=instructions:u
[speedup-link-3]: https://llvm-compile-time-tracker.com/compare.php?from=03da567f6351c725918293eb7ef9fd1a6ca46c7b&to=81a3c7a92dd0eb2a39a2f58e9a81eb832ad88c93&stat=instructions:u
[impl-link-1]: https://github.com/dc03/llvm-project/commit/116a48331e56df9220ab75f3da139c93c0f47389
[commit-link-4]: https://github.com/dc03/llvm-project/commit/3a09b3ab0bb45dd16f93ba1ed032a6f3cabd2450
[speedup-link-4]: https://llvm-compile-time-tracker.com/compare.php?from=116a48331e56df9220ab75f3da139c93c0f47389&to=3a09b3ab0bb45dd16f93ba1ed032a6f3cabd2450&stat=instructions:u
[commit-link-5]: https://github.com/dc03/llvm-project/commit/c855d7f85801fc52c431145898a22fabb26bf9e1
[speedup-link-5]: https://llvm-compile-time-tracker.com/compare.php?from=997820a5f5ee49a4053df7c803a83124afb88f69&to=c855d7f85801fc52c431145898a22fabb26bf9e1&stat=instructions:u