---
layout: post
title: "GSoC 2023 Week 19 and 20 - <i>That's All, Folks!</i>"
date: 29 September 2023 11:11:11 +0530
categories: blog
---

This blog post is related to my [GSoC 2023 Project][project-link].

Well, it is finally that time. Google Summer of Code 2023 is over for me, and I must say this has been one of the most
important things I have ever done. Much like last year, I have learned an absolute ton and feel even more confident in my
abilities now. Among other things, I can now say that I know how to profile code properly and make it run faster, and that I
am a compiler engineer as well as an LLVM contributor (finally!). I have covered all that I did in detail in my
[final report][final-report-link].

So, for the final time, in week 19 I made this patch:
[`[IRSymtab] Replace linear time lookup with DenseSet`][github-pr-1]. This was the last performance patch I was able to
make, giving a 0.09% speedup. I also put up the patch for `CachedBitsValue`: [`[InstCombine] Create a class to lazily track computed known bits`][github-pr-3]. This one's just waiting for a second round of reviews, it should land after that.

In week 20, `InferAlignment` landed. This patch set had been in development for 10 weeks at this point, so I am quite
happy to see it finally get integrated into the pipeline. Aside from that, I set up another PR to fix a random bug: [`[ValueTracking] Implement sdiv/udiv support for isKnownNonNullFromDominatingCondition`][github-pr-2]. Hopefully, this patch lands soon.

Now, what's next? For a while (a month or so), I will be taking a break from LLVM to focus on personal projects and spend
time learning other things for a while (foremost in my mind is Haskell). After that, I will be back contributing PRs and
hopefully helping review them as well. Next year, I plan on participating again in GSoC as a mentor.


[project-link]: https://summerofcode.withgoogle.com/programs/2023/projects/JdqGUwNq
[final-report-link]: https://docs.google.com/document/d/1gsOYrFOZlJ-RCHsb-MZzZyIYrGm9Esh4unjTioo58L4/edit?usp=sharing
[github-pr-1]: https://github.com/llvm/llvm-project/pull/66376
[github-pr-2]: https://github.com/llvm/llvm-project/pull/67282
[github-pr-3]: https://github.com/llvm/llvm-project/pull/66611