---
layout: post
title: "GSoC 2023 Week 10 and 11 - A Break And A Pass"
date: 24 July 2023 11:11:11 +0530
categories: blog
---


This blog post is related to my [GSoC 2023 Project][project-link].

I decided to take a break during week 10, mainly because I was starting to get tired but also because it was the last
week of my summer vacations and I wanted to clear my mind before heading back to college. Thus, I did not really do much
work during this week. I committed a patch to generalize the function `foldAndOrOfICmpEqZeroAndICmp`, which originally
did the following transform:

```java
(icmp eq X, 0) | (icmp ult Other, X) -> (icmp ule Other, X-1)
(icmp ne X, 0) & (icmp uge Other, X) -> (icmp ugt Other, X-1)
```

While looking at [this bug][bug-link], my mentor initially pointed out that this function is a good candidate to base
this patch off of. While looking further into it, I realized that the fold could be generalized to the following
transform and renamed the function to `foldAndOrOfICmpEqConstantAndICmp`:

```java
(icmp eq X, C) | (icmp ult Other, (X - C)) -> (icmp ule Other, (X - (C + 1)))
(icmp ne X, C) & (icmp uge Other, (X - C)) -> (icmp ugt Other, (X - (C + 1)))
```

And that was pretty much all I did. The past week, I have mainly been working on three things:
- Fixing bug [#33910][bug-link-2]

  As outlined in my proposal, this is a bug where `O(N^2)` behaviour was being caused in the metadata parser. This was
  mainly because of two things:
  - The files provided along with the bug had roughly 20,000 lines of almost-identical metadata lines which only
    differed in the `OffsetInBits` field. I have covered this before [here][blog-link].

  - The second part, which I have not made a patch for yet, involves changing the way the `replaceAllUsesWith` function
    works to only unique nodes once. This is still a work in progress, though it is mostly complete. This is a much
    bigger change, as it involves adding a way to call `MDNode::handleChangedOperand` without having it unique the node
    each time. To do this, I've introduced two functions:

    - `resolveChangedOperandWithoutUniquing` and
    - `handledChangedOperandWithoutUniquing`

    These add the node onto a map instead. The map is needed as `MDNode` calls the function `resolveAfterOperandChange`
    after uniquing, so we need to store the pointer to the `MDNode` and then the two pointers to the modified operands.
    Thus it leads to the type
    `SmallDenseMap<Metadata *, SmallVector<std::pair<void *, Metadata *>>>`.
   
    The vector is required because there may be
    multiple operands that need to be resolved after the node is uniqued. While the change itself is quite simple, the
    problem is mainly that `Metadata.h` is included absolutely everywhere, so every change to that header ends up
    recompiling approximately 1600-2000 files.

- Implementing the `InferAlignment` pass

  This pass was initially implemented by my mentor back in 2020, however problems arose because of the constant
  expression support in LLVM IR and the patch was basically abandoned. Now that he has pretty much
  removed all of the constant expression support, this pass can be added again. The implementation carries over almost
  exactly from the original commit, it is just updated to use the new pass manager.

  This pass was mainly motivated by the issue that `InstCombine` was spending a lot of its time just inferring alignment
  on instructions which is information that generally profits the back-end and not the middle-end. So, this pass slots
  in somewhere before the back-end passes run, the best place likely being before loop unrolling as that seems to
  disrupt the known bits information that this pass relies on.

  It gives a really decent result:
  - On removing alignment inference from `InstCombine`: [-1.3% instrs(u)][speedup-link-1]
  - On adding the pass into the pipeline: [+0.11% instrs(u)][speedup-link-2]

  Overall, this means a ~1.1% speedup.

- Patch [D155958][patch-link-2]

  This patch fixes an inefficiency that my mentor noticed - the handling for `LoadInst` in
  `ValueTracking::isKnownNonZero` ends up calling `computeKnownBits` the most out of any instruction, however it is not
  necessary at all because this information is already checked by `rangeMetadataExcludesValue` here:

  ```cpp
  if (auto *I = dyn_cast<Instruction>(V)) {
    if (MDNode *Ranges = Q.IIQ.getMetadata(I, LLVMContext::MD_range)) {
      // If the possible ranges don't contain zero, then the value is
      // definitely non-zero.
      if (auto *Ty = dyn_cast<IntegerType>(V->getType())) {
        const APInt ZeroValue(Ty->getBitWidth(), 0);
        if (rangeMetadataExcludesValue(Ranges, ZeroValue))
          return true;
      }
    }
  }
  ```

  This is because `computeKnownBits` for `LoadInst` only checks the range metadata as well, so it is completely
  redundant to call it. This also means that it ends up doing the check twice each time it returns false. Removing the
  check gives a [0.12% speedup][speedup-link-3].

In the coming week I should be able to finalize the patches for #33910 (even though it is not likely to be merged
because it is a really fringe case, but hey I fixed it!) and the `InferAlignment` pass. After that, I will also try to
fix the other bugs that I had mentioned in my proposal.

[project-link]: https://summerofcode.withgoogle.com/programs/2023/projects/JdqGUwNq
[bug-link]: https://github.com/llvm/llvm-project/issues/63749
[bug-link-2]: https://github.com/llvm/llvm-project/issues/33910
[patch-link]: https://reviews.llvm.org/D154937
[patch-link-2]: https://reviews.llvm.org/D155958
[blog-link]: http://localhost:4000/blog/GSoC_2023_Week_4_2023_06_09.html
[speedup-link-1]: https://llvm-compile-time-tracker.com/compare.php?from=174300a283089b2631b9d5a5ed0b4effce382106&to=adcb4cef059430e662a90058b2d29c0a61a3b932&stat=instructions:u
[speedup-link-2]: https://llvm-compile-time-tracker.com/compare.php?from=64ba26ac0263607d7071973faf251838defc9ab3&to=aa0e4c7462775df5294ea06e2c89d653d437b8db&stat=instructions:u
[speedup-link-3]: https://llvm-compile-time-tracker.com/compare.php?from=910450a28ba9ce5ad67ff62d5cbb4fa81d567aac&to=e91c80220b014e64339fe4d96882f66e566e38a6&stat=instructions:u