---
layout: post
title: "GSoC 2023 Week 17 and 18 - Same old, same old"
date: 29 August 2023 11:11:11 +0530
categories: blog
---

This blog post is related to my [GSoC 2023 Project][project-link].

These two weeks, I worked on finding some more random optimization patches and
also fixed [`#88580`][rust-bug-link].

Regarding `#88580`, the fix was quite simple: the problem was being caused by
the fact that SROA was creating too many partitions for the alloca. This meant
that for a single alloca, it was possible that tens of thousands of loads or
stores could be generated, in which case a compile time explosion would occur in
passes like `DeadStoreElimination` and `MemCpyOpt`.

The way that SROA works is that it takes as its input an alloca instruction, and
then tries to split it into multiple (hopefully smaller) allocas. The
terminology is that an alloca is split into "splices", and these splices further
consist of "partitions". From what I understand, a partition is basically an
indivisible unit of the alloca, for example a single (i.e. scalar) element.

So, to fix this, it was quite simple to just add a CLI option to limit the
number of slices that alloca is allowed to generate (calculating partitions was
harder and not really worth the effort, though it would be a more accurate
measurement). This change landed [here][fix-link].

After this, I have gone back to trying to find more performance improvements.
I have found some more, though progress has been really slow:

- Manually unroll a loop involving `MCRegUnitRootIterator`: [0.15% speedup][perf-link-1]

  This is something I discovered when I was going through profiles for
  the `ReachingDefAnalysis` pass and I noticed `LiveRegUnits::stepBackward` was
  taking quite a lot of time in that. After digging through it a bit, I found
  out that the culprit was `LiveRegUnits::removeRegsNotPreserved`, a simple
  function that just has two loops within it. I initially assumed that the
  issue was being caused by the usage of a `BitVector`, but interestingly after
  digging even further it turned out to be caused by `MCRegUnitRootIterator`.

  `MCRegUnitRootIterator` is a simple iterator type that contains two integers
  to represent the root registers of a regunit. Only two integers are used
  because a regunit is only allowed to have two root registers. The type tries
  to be fancy and "iterates" over the registers by shuffling the value from the
  second register to the first on increment and setting the second register to
  an invalid value. Basically,

  ```cpp
  struct MCRegUnitRootIterator {
    int Reg0, Reg1;

    bool isValid()    { return Reg0 != INVALID; }
    void operator++() { Reg0 = Reg1; Reg1 = INVALID; }
  }
  ```

  What this means is that only two iterations will ever occur because on the
  first, `Reg0`s value will be used and on the second, `Reg1`s value will be
  used (through `Reg0`), following which `Reg0` will be set to `INVALID` and
  iteration will stop.
  
  However, the compiler is not smart enough to see through this completely and
  ends up not optimizing this data structure very well. By manually unrolling
  the loop, the compiler knows that the iterator will only advance once when
  valid and will then advance into an invalid state. So, it is able to optimize
  it much better.

- Change a `TinyPtrVector` to a `SmallVector`: [0.1% speedup][perf-link-2]

  This one is quite simple, I noticed that the `ReachingDefAnalysis` pass was
  spending quite some time in appending to vectors, so I was playing around with
  changing the types and landed on this patch. Unfortunately, this gives a 
  disproportionately large change in the memory usage: an increase of [0.7%][mem-link],
  which means the patch is not really usable at all. 

- Replace an O(n) lookup with a `DenseSet`: [0.1% speedup on LTO][perf-link-3]

  This one is another case of linear-time lookup on a static table, much the
  same as in [D157951][review-link]. In this case, it occurs in the IR symbol
  table builder, when it checks for the presence of "preserved symbols". These
  are stored in a table of `const char *`, which is then looked up through
  `llvm::is_contained`. The patch for this is the exact same as `D157951`,
  just using a `DenseSet` instead of a `DenseMap` (because only existence needs
  to be checked).

- Inline `getNumBytesForUTF8` into `ConvertUTF.h`: [0.1% regression on -O0 -g][regression-link]

  This is a function I have been seeing for a while in `X86AsmPrinter` using up
  a lot of time, where it is just a simple one-liner that looks up a table and
  adds one to the result. Because it is present in a `.cpp` file, it cannot be
  inlined, and ends up wasting a lot of time on `call`/`ret` instructions (in
  non-LTO builds).

  I noticed quite a huge uplift when profiling with `llc`, specifically on
  compiling bitcode files at `-O0`, however this was strangely not reproduced
  on the compile time tracker. Given that this is used in `AsmPrinter`, I would
  expect it to affect any build configuration, so some deeper inspection is
  required here.

  This patch is basically the same as [D152781][review-link-2].

The `InferAlignment` patches should land soon, only the review for the last
patch is left now. In the meantime, I will continue trying to find perf patches
like these to hopefully get a cumulative speedup of 0.6% on `-O3`, which should
(again, hopefully) get my project to a 3% overall speedup. I am also
concurrently working on my final report at this point, and it has been very fun
to go all-out designer mode on what is basically a word document :)

[project-link]: https://summerofcode.withgoogle.com/programs/2023/projects/JdqGUwNq
[rust-bug-link]: https://github.com/rust-lang/rust/issues/88580
[fix-link]: https://github.com/llvm/llvm-project/commit/e13e808283f7fd9e873ae922dd1ef61aeaa0eb4a
[perf-link-1]: https://llvm-compile-time-tracker.com/compare.php?from=2f59195649fae0f4567bddd1eecb00a019b70525&to=e518e379ae877d991fb44c7a5b57ee2dc27dbe62&stat=instructions:u
[perf-link-2]: https://llvm-compile-time-tracker.com/compare.php?from=e518e379ae877d991fb44c7a5b57ee2dc27dbe62&to=0d342093bce6c42fa361f9dfab6ee2a956fd066f&stat=instructions:u
[mem-link]: https://llvm-compile-time-tracker.com/compare.php?from=e518e379ae877d991fb44c7a5b57ee2dc27dbe62&to=0d342093bce6c42fa361f9dfab6ee2a956fd066f&stat=max-rss
[perf-link-3]: https://llvm-compile-time-tracker.com/compare.php?from=0d342093bce6c42fa361f9dfab6ee2a956fd066f&to=c75a506981d129883c9f0ddfc67c4eab47df4c26&stat=instructions:u
[review-link]: https://reviews.llvm.org/D157951
[regression-link]: https://llvm-compile-time-tracker.com/compare.php?from=c75a506981d129883c9f0ddfc67c4eab47df4c26&to=e47928e1ad0c4de6874ccf757ec86ca1032000f2&stat=instructions:u
[review-link-2]: https://reviews.llvm.org/D152781